add page for PX4 ROS library (#2740)
PX4/PX4-user_guide: en/ros2/px4_sdk.md

> # PX4 SDK

Reviewer: The name :-(

The [PX4 SDK](https://github.com/PX4/px4_sdk) is a C++ library to simplify controlling PX4 from ROS 2.

> It allows to write external modes that are dynamically registered with PX4 and behave the same way as internal ones.

Reviewer: "allows to" omits a subject.
```suggestion
It allows developers to write external modes that are dynamically registered with PX4 and behave the same way as internal ones.
```

A mode can send different types of setpoints, ranging from high-level navigation tasks all the way down to direct actuator controls.

> 

Reviewer: Does it also provide co-ordinate system mappings? I.e. if you write a setpoint, do you need to think about translation into PX4 land?

> ## Overview

Reviewer: You could consider omitting this heading and moving all others up a level. If you do this you can't add too much here, but you could turn "### Comparison to Offboard Control" into a few sentences and put that here too. So "These modes are first class citizens blah blah. This approach offers many benefits over conventional offboard control because ...".

Just a thought.

This diagram provides a conceptual overview:

> ![ROS2 modes overview diagram](../../assets/middleware/ros2/px4_sdk/ros2_modes_overview.svg)

Reviewer: The diagram is great. Say you're in payload delivery mode. Does PX4 have the concept that it is in a payload delivery mode, and if so is this worth showing? Or is it more that PX4 thinks it is under external control/some special mode.

It might not matter if the story is "ROS2 modes are first-class modes ". But you could put a dashed box to show that it has some presence in PX4. Just a thought.

<!-- Source: https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/1WByCfgcytnaow7r41VhYJL8OGrw1RjFO51GoPMQBCNA/edit -->

The following sections define and explain the terms used in the diagram.

### Definitions

#### Mode

> 

Reviewer: This might be where you could say something like "A mode running in ROS2 is a first class peer of other modes in the system ..."

> - A mode is a component that can send setpoints to the vehicle, which control its motion (such as velocity or direct actuator commands).

Reviewer: Good to list the setpoints somewhere below and link to them.

> - It is passive, meaning it does not activate other modes (by sending commands), and it must be activated by someone else (either the user through RC/GCS, the FMU in a failsafe situation or by a _mode executor_).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A mode can't activate other modes (by sending commands), and must be activated by the user (through RC/GCS), the flight controller in a failsafe situation, a _mode executor_, or some other external system.
```

- It selects a setpoint type and sends it while it is active.
  A mode can switch between multiple setpoint types.

> - Has a name displayed by the GCS.

Reviewer: Only a name, or other information?

> - Can configure its mode requirements (for example that it requires a valid position estimate).

Reviewer: should we link to the requirements that can be set?

> - A mode can consist of different tasks (for example flying to a target, lowering a winch, releasing a payload and then fly back).

Reviewer: Do tasks have any specific meaning in code, as they do in PX4? If not, then:
```suggestion
- A mode can perform different tasks, such as flying to a target, lowering a winch, releasing a payload and then fly back.
```

#### Mode Executor

> 

Reviewer: It would be good to pull out one of these as an introductory sentence. I move the topic "When would you use a mode executor?" - something like this:

```suggestion
A mode executor is an optional component, associated with a mode, for putting the vehicle into a state where the mode can be activated.
For example, the mode executor for a payload delivery mode might first trigger a take-off, then switch to the mode to deliver the payload, and when that completes trigger an RTL.
```

FMI is the state machine flexible? I.e. my executor for above case might be called when already in the air - can it skip the takeoff state?

- A mode executor is an optional component one level higher than a mode. It is a state machine that can activate modes, and wait for their completion.
- It can only do so while it is in charge.
  For that, an executor has exactly one _owned mode_ (and a mode can be owned by at most one executor).
  This mode serves as activation for the executor: when the user selects the mode, the owning executor gets activated and can select any mode.
  It stays in charge until the user switches modes (by RC or from a GCS), or a failsafe triggers a mode switch.
  Should the failsafe clear, the executor gets reactivated.
- This allows multiple executors to coexist.
- Executors cannot activate other executors.
- Within the SDK, a mode executor is always implemented in combination with a custom mode.

:::note
- These definitions guarantee that a user can take away control from a custom mode or executor at any point in time by commanding a mode switch through RC or a GCS.
- A mode executor is transparent to the user.
  It gets indirectly selected and activated through the owning mode, and thus the mode should be named accordingly.
:::

##### When would you use a mode executor?

> The most common use-case is the execution of an autonomous 'mission', such as a survey or a payload delivery: the executor triggers a take-off, then switches to a custom mode which performs the survey, and when completed, triggers an RTL.

Reviewer: As above, I think this would be better integrated into the topic https://github.com/PX4/PX4-user_guide/pull/2740/files#r1332395891

#### Configuration Overrides

> Both modes and executors can define configuration overrides, allowing to customize certain behaviors while the mode or executor is active.

Reviewer: Link to where we show how this is done

These are currently implemented:

- Disabling auto-disarm. This allows for landing and then taking off again (e.g. to release a payload).
- Ability to defer non-essential failsafes.
  It allows for example an executor to run a critical action without being interrupted by low-battery failsafe, such as controlling a winch.

### Comparison to Offboard Control

The above concepts provide a number of advantages over traditional [offboard control](../ros/offboard_control.md):

- Multiple nodes or applications can coexist and even run at the same time. It is clearly defined which node can control the vehicle at any given time.
- Exposing a selectable mode to the GCS.
- Integrated with the failsafe state machine and arming checks.
- It is well-defined which setpoint types can be sent.

> - It is possible to replace an FMU-internal mode (such as RTL).

Reviewer: Is FMU better than flight controller internal?

> ## Getting Started

Reviewer: Getting started is OK. However you might also split this into "Installing the SDK" and "Testing the Installation". I kind of prefer that.
One the other hand, if you were to pull this into its own doc and call it a QuickStart I might feel differently.

The following steps are required to get started:

1. Make sure you have a working [ROS 2 setup](../ros/ros2_comm.md), with _px4_msgs_ in the ROS 2 workspace.
2. Clone the SDK into the workspace:

   ```shell
   cd $ros_workspace/src
   git clone --recursive https://github.com/PX4/px4_sdk.git
   ```

   :::note
   To ensure compatibility, use the latest _main_ branches for PX4, _px4_msgs_ and the SDK.

>    See also [here](https://github.com/PX4/px4_sdk#compatibility-with-px4).

Reviewer: This makes me uncomfortable - it basically says we ensure compatibility of the SDK by forcing you to use an unstable version of PX4. The linked doc is better in that it says we might change this in future. We should come up with a plan now and let people know.

The linked doc mentions this, which should also appear in this doc (I haven't checked) but it is cool:

> The SDK checks for message compatibility on startup when registering a mode. ALL_PX4_SDK_MESSAGES defines the set of checked messages. If you use other messages, you can check them using:
```
if (!px4_sdk::messageCompatibilityCheck(node, {{"/fmu/in/vehicle_rates_setpoint"}})) {
  throw std::runtime_error("Messages incompatible");
}
```

   :::

3. Build the workspace:

   ```shell
   cd ..
   source install/setup.bash
   colcon build
   ```

4. In a different shell, start PX4 SITL (you can use any model or simulator):

   ```shell
   cd $px4-autopilot
   make px4_sitl gazebo-classic
   ```

5. Run the micro XRCE agent in a new shell (you can keep it running afterward):

   ```shell
   MicroXRCEAgent udp4 -p 8888
   ```

6. Start QGroundControl.

   :::note
   Use QGroundControl Daily, which supports dynamically updating the list of modes.
   :::

> 7. Back in the ROS 2 terminal, run one of the example modes:

Reviewer: This is the reason I was thinking of the split  "Installing the SDK" and "Testing the Installation". This is something you do once to verify the installation - it's not instructions you do every time. On the other hand, it does help you understand how you might test installation.

What debug do you get by default and what have you injected in your ROS node? I.e.

   ```shell
   ros2 run example_mode_manual_cpp example_mode_manual
   ```

>    You should get an output like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You should get an output like this showing 'My Manual Mode' mode being registered:
```

   [DEBUG] [example_mode_manual]: Subscriber found, continuing
   [DEBUG] [example_mode_manual]: Publisher found, continuing
   [DEBUG] [example_mode_manual]: Got RegisterExtComponentReply
   [DEBUG] [example_mode_manual]: Arming check request (id=1, only printed once)
   ```

8. On the PX4 shell, you can check that PX4 registered the new mode:

   ```shell
   commander status
   ```

   The output should contain:

   ```{5}
   INFO  [commander] Disarmed
   INFO  [commander] navigation mode: Position
   INFO  [commander] user intended navigation mode: Position
   INFO  [commander] in failsafe: no
   INFO  [commander] External Mode 1: nav_state: 23, name: My Manual Mode
   ```

9. At this point you should be able to see the mode in QGroundControl as well:

   ![QGC Modes](../../assets/middleware/ros2/px4_sdk/qgc_modes.png)

10. Select the mode, make sure you have a manual control source (physical or virtual joystick), and arm the vehicle.
    The mode will then activate, and it should print the following output:

    ```
    [DEBUG] [example_mode_manual]: Mode 'My Manual Mode' activated
    ```

11. Now you are ready to create your own mode.

> ## Mode Tutorial

Reviewer: You could call this a tutorial, but I'd called it a partially worked example. I think this is very useful, I'm just not sure that there isn't "more to it". For example, how do we associate this with a node? Why is it in an hpp file/does it matter.

This would be better as part of "How to use the SDK" - say as "Mode Class Definition", and separately have a full tutorial that works through the real example more thoroughly.

Reviewer: PS There is obviously some magic that happens to tell PX4 it has a new class. It might be worth identifying that part - could be as simple as "Deriving from XX registers the mode using internal APIs" or similar. That would give hints to someone who wants to understand the underlying code, or if a class didn't register properly.

This section steps through an example for a custom mode class.

> For a complete application, check out the [examples in the repository](https://github.com/PX4/px4_sdk/tree/main/examples/cpp).

Reviewer: Might be worth providing "such as" links https://github.com/PX4/px4_sdk/blob/main/examples/cpp/modes/rtl_replacement/include/mode.hpp

```cpp{1,5,7-9,24-31}

> class MyMode : public px4_sdk::ModeBase // [1]

Reviewer: How do I set that my new mode is hidden in the ground station? 

How do I set that my new mode is advanced, and should only be displayed in an advanced section of the UI?

{
public:
  explicit MyMode(rclcpp::Node & node)
  : ModeBase(node, Settings{"My Mode"}) // [2]
  {
    // [3]
    _manual_control_input = std::make_shared<px4_sdk::ManualControlInput>(*this);
    _rates_setpoint = std::make_shared<px4_sdk::RatesSetpointType>(*this);
  }

  void onActivate() override
  {
    // Called whenever our mode gets selected
  }

  void onDeactivate() override
  {
    // Called when our mode gets deactivated
  }

  void updateSetpoint(float dt_s) override
  {
    // [4]
    Eigen::Vector3f thrust_sp{};
    thrust_sp(2) = -_manual_control_input->throttle();
    Eigen::Vector3f rates_sp{};
    rates_sp(0) = _manual_control_input->roll() * 150.F * M_PI / 180.F;
    rates_sp(1) = -_manual_control_input->pitch() * 150.F * M_PI / 180.F;
    rates_sp(2) = _manual_control_input->yaw() * 100.F * M_PI / 180.F;
    _rates_setpoint->update(rates_sp, thrust_sp);
  }

private:
  std::shared_ptr<px4_sdk::ManualControlInput> _manual_control_input;
  std::shared_ptr<px4_sdk::RatesSetpointType> _rates_setpoint;
};
```

- **[1]**: First we create a class that inherits from `px4_sdk::ModeBase`

> - **[2]**: In the constructor, we pass the mode name. This also allows to configure some other things, like replacing an FMU-internal mode.

Reviewer: Can we link to where you show a list of all the things you can configure, or (not quite as good) the instructions on how to override an internal mode.
```suggestion
- **[2]**: In the constructor, we pass the mode name. This also allows us to configure some other things, like replacing an FMU-internal mode.
```

- **[3]**: This is where we create all objects that we want to use later on.
  This can be RC input, setpoint type(s), or telemetry. `*this` is passed as a `Context` to each object, which associates the object with the mode.
- **[4]**: Whenever the mode is active, this method gets called regularly (the update rate depends on the setpoint type).
  Here is where we can do our work and generate a new setpoint.

## How to use the SDK

General notes on how to use the SDK:

- coordinate convention: TODO

The following sections describe specific functionality.
Apart from that, any other PX4 topic can be subscribed or published directly.

### Setpoint Types

A mode can choose its setpoint type(s) it wants to use to control the vehicle.
The used types also define the compatibility with different vehicle types.

The following sections provide a list of commonly used setpoint types.
You can also add your own type by adding a class that inherits from `px4_sdk::SetpointBase`, sets the configuration flags according to what the setpoint requires, and then publishes any topic containing a setpoint.

> #### Smooth Position

Reviewer: Nothing wrong with this, but might be worth providing context for all cases:

```suggestion
#### Smooth Position Setpoints
```

TODO

#### Direct Actuator Control

Actuators can be directly controlled using the [px4_sdk::DirectActuatorsSetpointType](https://github.com/PX4/px4_sdk/blob/main/px4_sdk_cpp/include/px4_sdk/control/setpoint_types/direct_actuators.hpp) setpoint type.
Motors and servos can be set independently. Be aware that the assignment is vehicle and setup-specific.
For example to control a quadrotor, you need to set the first 4 motors according to its [output configuration](../concept/control_allocation.md).

:::note
If you want to control an actuator that does not control the vehicle's motion, but for example a payload servo, see [below](#controlling-an-independent-actuator-servo).
:::

### Controlling an Independent Actuator/Servo

If you want to control an independent actuator (a servo), follow these steps:

> 1. [Configure the output](../payloads/#generic-actuator-control-with-mavlink)

Reviewer: FYI Some idiot removed MAVlink generic actuator control and it hasn't been added back yet - https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/issues/21966

I'm sure this still works under the hood, but if that doesn't get fixed I will have to hide this linked doc or add a big warning. That might break this.

Author: I've tested DO_SET_ACUTUATOR cmd within the sdk, it all works. I'm not sure what @junwoo091400 thinks is wrong.

Reviewer: Oh, I thought that SDK used ROS2 - I thought the MAVLink interface had been removed. @julianoes do you have an existing test case for the do_set_actuator in MAVSDK that could easily verify it?

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/mavlink/MAVSDK/tree/v1.4/examples/set_actuator

2. Create an instance of [px4_sdk::OffboardActuatorControls](https://github.com/PX4/px4_sdk/blob/main/px4_sdk_cpp/include/px4_sdk/control/offboard_actuators.hpp) in the constructor of your mode

> 3. Call the `set` method to control the actuator(s). This can be done independently of any active setpoints.

Reviewer: Code fragment or link to code showing last two points would be awesome.

### Telemetry

> Telemetry, such as local or global position estimates can be found under [px4_sdk/odometry](https://github.com/PX4/px4_sdk/tree/main/px4_sdk_cpp/include/px4_sdk/odometry).

Reviewer: What is special about this? I mean there are other ways to get telemetry in ROS, so 
- why did you choose to create this
- can you give a list of the main telemetry items covered - reduce amount of digging
- An example might be nice "This is used by modes that need positioning to plan future movement blah blah"

Author: A few reasons:
- for convenience
- changing the message does not mean you have to change your code
- using them automatically sets the mode requirement flags

I expect more things to be added in near future.

### Failsafes and Mode Requirements

Each mode has a set of requirement flags. These are generally automatically set, depending on which objects are used within the context of a mode. For example when adding manual control input with

```cpp
_manual_control_input = std::make_shared<px4_sdk::ManualControlInput>(*this);
```

the requirement flag for manual control gets set.
Specifically, setting a flag has the following consequences in PX4, if the condition is not met:

- arming is not allowed, while the mode is selected
- when already armed, the mode cannot be selected
- when armed and the mode is selected, the relevant failsafe is triggered (e.g. RC loss for the manual control requirement).
  Check the [safety page](../config/safety.md) for how to configure failsafe behavior.
  A failsafe is also triggered when the mode crashes or becomes unresponsive while it is selected.

It is possible to manually update any mode requirement after the mode is registered. For example to add home position as requirement:

```cpp

> modeRequirements().home_position = true;

Reviewer: Can we list all the requirements you can set, or link to how you can find them?

The example above of manual mode and what gets set is awesome. Would be good to expand out the other modes and their implicit requirements. Why I'm interested here is that it's good to make it easy for people to understand what they can do, and when they might be able to do it.

The trade off is time to document and time to maintain. So you might alternatively link to source that shows the options, or source code that shows how you can easily list the requirements (all of them) that the mode currently has.

```

#### Deferring Failsafes

A mode or mode executor can temporarily defer non-essential failsafes.
To do so, use the method `deferFailsafesSync`. And to get notified when a failsafe would be triggered, override the method `void onFailsafeDeferred()`.

> Check the [integration test](https://github.com/PX4/px4_sdk/blob/main/px4_sdk_cpp/test/integration/overrides.cpp#L167) for an example.

Reviewer: 1.  Copy in an example. These links change ^^^ - right now I could not do this without the link.
2. This should be linked from where you mention the config change previously. 
3. I'd be tempted to have config things all listed under a config section so that someone can see what their config options are "all together". This works too, but next person who comes along might not be so sure where to update/add a new config option.

### Assigning a Mode to an RC Switch or Joystick Action

> External modes can be assigned to RC switches or joystick actions.

Reviewer: Link to RC switches and Joysticks sections

> When assigning a mode to an RC switch, you need to know the index.

Reviewer: Why? Don't you just need the name?
To put it another way, the mode assignment shows a distinct name, so when/why do you need the index?

Author: The parameter metadata does not contain the dynamic mode name

Reviewer: It might be worth saying "why" in the docs, unless you already did so.

Use `commander status` while the mode is running to get that information.
For example:

```plain
   INFO  [commander] External Mode 1: nav_state: 23, name: My Manual Mode
```

means you would select **External Mode 1** in QGC:
![QGC Mode Assignment](../../assets/middleware/ros2/px4_sdk/qgc_mode_assignment.png)

:::note

> PX4 ensures a given mode is always assignment to the same index by storing a hash of the mode name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PX4 ensures a given mode is always assigned to the same index by storing a hash of the mode name.
```

This makes it independent of startup ordering in case of multiple external modes.
:::

### Replacing an Internal Mode

> An external mode can replace an existing internal mode, such as RTL. By doing so, whenever RTL gets selected (through the user or a failsafe situation), the external mode is used instead of the internal one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An external mode can replace an existing internal mode, such as [Return](../flight_modes/return.md) mode (RTL).
By doing so, whenever RTL gets selected (through the user or a failsafe situation), the external mode is used instead of the internal one.
```

The internal one is only used as a fallback when the external one becomes unresponsive or crashes.

The replacement mode can be set in the settings of the `ModeBase` constructor:

```cpp

> Settings{kName, false, ModeBase::kModeIDRtl}

Reviewer: Perhaps show code with the surrounding constructor? I'm also interested in what the values are for modes, such as `kModeIDRtl` - list them?

```

> ## CI: Integration Tests

Reviewer: Great you added this. Any guidance needed for writing tests?
